---
layout: post
title: 'Form T1198: A Technical Interpretation of QRLSPs'
description: 
image: assets/images/pic21.jpg
nav-menu: false
show_tile: false
---

<style>
  p {
    margin-bottom: 15px; /* Reduce space below paragraphs */
  }

  hr.major {
    margin: 10px 0; /* Equal space above and below the <hr> */
  }
</style>

<!-- Credits -->
<div class="row">
	<div class="12u">
		<p>By: <b>Ken Lee</b> | KLee Tax and Financial Services Co.<br> Published: 11 April 2025 4:55PM EST (Updated 17 April 2025 8: EST)</p>
	</div>
</div>

<hr class="major"/>

<!-- Content -->

<section>
  <div class="row">
	  <div class="12u">
    <p>Photo Credit: CPA British Columbia</p>
    <p><i>This article is not part of the regular 'MaxMillions with Ken' series, and is intended to provide subject specific guidence to interested parties. As always, consulting your usual tax professional is highly suggested. </i></p>
		<p>Good evening Toronto! The Bill 124 settlement provided a retroactive raise to Ontario public sector workers, paid out as a lump sum payment in the 2024 tax year. As such, affected employees received either <b>Form T1198, Qualifying Retroactive Lump-Sum Payment (QRLSP)</b>, or a letter with the equivalent information. This article explains the calculations of T1198 and offers a technical interpretation of its ramifications.</p>
    <p>T1198 (or the letter) contains information on how the LSP <b>relates to the current and previous tax years</b>, along with any associated interest. Any amounts listed that were included on T1198 will have also been <b>included</b> on the taxpayer’s 2024 T4 slip. The taxpayer may elect to include the form on their tax return. Regardless of the option chosen (as explained below), they are still liable to <b>pay income tax, EI, and CPP</b> on these amounts.</p>
    <p>To that end, there are <b>two</b> options in claiming the income with T1198. The <b>first</b> option would be <b>not</b> to attach it to the return. In this case, the lump sum will be <b>treated as if it were solely earned in the tax year it was paid</b> – in this case, 2024. 
    <p>If attached to the return, the CRA will perform an <b>alternative calculation</b>. In this scenario, the portion of the LSP allocated to the previous taxation year (as per the letter) will be split and <b>assessed as if it were earned in the respective past year</b>. As part of this, <b>any taxes</b> owing on the reallocated amount will be <b>‘brought forward’</b> and added to the 2024 return’s balance. No NOAs/NORs are issued for the previous years as part of this assessment. Importantly, the taxpayer will be <b>required to pay interest from that year to the current year.</b> See ITA §120.31(3). </p> 
    <p>For example, suppose Remi received a QRLSP of <b>$16,000</b> in 2024, with <b>$5,000</b> each for 2022, 2023, and 2024. The remaining <b>$1,000</b> is interest. To simplify the calculation, we will assume she made <b>$110,000</b> in each taxation year. In the case of the 2024 tax year, this amount does <b>not include</b> the lump sum.</p>
    <ul>
      <li>If Remi does not elect to include T1198, her income in 2024 will be <b>$126,000</b>, including the lump sum.</li>
      <li>If she includes T1198, her income would be assessed as if it were <b>$115,000</b> for 2022 and 2023 and <b>$116,000</b> (including the retroactive payment and <b>$1,000</b> interest) in 2024.</li>
    </ul>
    <p>Due to the generally low amounts (in ratio to salaries) of the settlement, the alternative calculation generally will result in a similar or <b>worse</b> result (due to interest charges) over not including it. Regardless, <b>it should be included</b>, as the CRA <a href="https://taxinterpretations.com/cra/severed-letters/2008-0264231e5"><b>confirmed*</b></a> that it would only apply the calculation <b>if it is beneficial</b> to the taxpayer.</p>
    <p><i>*Editor's note: This letter is from 2009, but the CRA has reconfirmed in an email to KLee Tax that they continue to apply the 'better-of-two' policy.</i></p>
    <p><b>A bit about us</b>: <b>KLee Tax</b> specializes in filing tax returns for individuals, businesses, and corporations. Whether you are working your first job, running a business, or an NPO looking to make a difference, you can be sure that <b>KLee Tax</b> will be there for your tax needs, when and where you need us.</p>
    <p><b>Unsure of where to start? Be sure to reach out below!</b></p>
