---
layout: post
title: 'Registered Plans: From First Home to Tax Wins'
description: 
image: assets/images/pic22.jpg
nav-menu: false
show_tile: false
---

<style>
  p {
    margin-bottom: 15px; /* Reduce space below paragraphs */
  }

  hr.major {
    margin: 10px 0; /* Equal space above and below the <hr> */
  }
</style>

<!-- Credits -->
<div class="row">
	<div class="12u">
		<p>By: <b>Ken Lee</b> | KLee Tax and Financial Services Co.<br> Published: 21 April 2025 4:00AM EST (Updated 21 April 2025 4:01AM EST)</p>
	</div>
</div>

<hr class="major"/>

<!-- Content -->

<section>
  <div class="row">
	  <div class="12u">
		<p><p><i>Photo Credit: The Mortgage Advisors</i></p>
    <p>Before we start, you may find these words helpful:</p>
    <ul>
      <li><b>FHSA - First Home Savings Act</b></li>
      <li><b>ITA - Income Tax Act</b>: References to the 'Act' mean the ITA</li>
      <li><b>RRSP - Registered Retirement Savings Plan</b></li>
      <li><b>RRIF - Registered Retirement Income Fund</b></li>
      <li><b>TFSA - Tax Free Savings Account</b></li>
    </ul>
    <p>Good morning Toronto! Last week, we explored, in depth, the workings of the RRSP. This article will build on last week by examining the regulations of the <b>FHSA</b> – a newly introduced Registered Plan. We will also take a close look at how the three Registered Plans – TFSA, RRSP, and FHSA – can be used in tandem to form a robust approach in personal and family tax planning.</p>
    <p>A <b>Registered Plan</b> is an account that is registered with the government, that offers special tax benefits. An individual may only hold <b>Qualified Investments</b> in these accounts. In terms of eligibility, the Act requires that any individual opening any Registered Plan be a <b>tax resident</b> of Canada and <b>18 years</b> of age*, in addition to other requirements which vary from plan-to-plan.</p>
    <p><i>*Note that the individual <b>must</b> be of the age of majority to enter into contracts (such as opening Registered Plans). Because of this, one must be <b>19</b> in BC, NS, NL, YT, NT, and NU to open these Plans.</i></p>
    <p>As a quick recap, the RRSP is a savings plan which provides that all capital gains will be <b>tax-deferred</b>. Income is only taxed at withdrawal, at the prevailing income tax rates for employment income. Contribution room is income-based (<b>18% of earned income</b>, to a <b>maximum of $31,650</b> in 2025), but these contributions are reduced by any workplace retirement benefits (DC/DB pension). Contribution rooms (and the resultant tax deductions) can be carried forward. For an in-depth explanation of Qualified Investments and about the RRSP in general, see our previous post ‘<b><a href="https://kleetax.ca/posts/2025/04-07-rrsp/">RRSP: Really Radical Savings Plan?</a></b>’ for more information.</p>
    <p>On the other hand, the <b>TFSA</b>, as the name suggests, is <b>tax-free</b>, meaning that any growth in the account would <b>not be subject to capital gains tax</b>. However, while annual contributions (<b>$7000 for 2025</b>; indexed to inflation, to the nearest $500) can be <b>carried forward</b>, they are <b>not tax-deductible</b>.</p>
    <p>In combining the best of each plan (that is, tax-free growth and tax deductions), one would end up with the FHSA. With the FHSA, the individual can contribute is <b>capped at $8k in the first year</b> the plan is open, and <b>uncapped in subsequent years</b>, to a total <b>lifetime contribution limit of $40,000</b>.</p>
    <p>In terms of additional requirements, the TFSA imposes none, while the RRSP has the <i>de facto</i> requirement that the individual have earned income. In this vein, the reader would be fair to assume that FHSAs, as the name suggests, require the individual to have never owned a home. Somewhat misleadingly, the definition of a <b>Qualified Individual</b>, contained in <b>ITA §146.6(1)</b>, reads that:</p>
    <blockquote>[The individual] did not, at any prior time in the calendar year or in the preceding four calendar years, inhabit as a principal place of residence a qualifying home (or what would be a qualifying home if it were located in Canada) that was owned, whether jointly with another person or otherwise, by [...] the individual, or [...] a person who is the spouse or common-law partner of the individual at the particular time.<br>   – §146.6(1), Income Tax Act</blockquote>
    <div class="box">
	    <p>Let’s consider an example. Rita owns an apartment in Vancouver, yet has been renting and living in another apartment in Toronto since <b>1 July 2019</b>. Even though she owns a qualifying home (property in Canada), she did <i>not</i> primarily live in that property for the current calendar year (2025) and the last 4 calendar years (2020-2024 inclusive), thereby <b>failing</b> the <b>ordinary presence test</b> of determining principal residence status, making that home <b>not</b> a principal residence. By virtue of this status, she is <b>technically eligible for an FHSA</b>, despite already owning property! However, if her spouse/common-law partner did own and primarily live in property they own (outright or jointly), Rita would <b>lose</b> FHSA eligibility.</p>
    </div>
    <p>A <b>Qualifying Withdrawal</b> is also defined under ITA §146.6(1), which further imposes that, in addition to the individual’s principal residence status (described above), a written agreement to buy (or build) the home was <b>signed before the withdrawal</b>. The home must then be <b>‘acquired’ or built before 1 October of the year following the withdrawal</b>. This same passage also allows that the home to have been <b>‘acquired’ before the withdrawal</b>, provided this happened in the <b>30 days before withdrawal</b>. If these conditions are met, the individual shall hence submit <b>Form RC725</b> to the managing institution to facilitate the withdrawal.</p>
    <p>Note that the wording in the Act uses the word <b>‘acquired’</b>, and not <b>purchased</b>. The CRA, in conference with <b>Le Association de Planification Fiscale et Financière (Association of Tax and Financial Planning)</b>, has stated that:</p>
    <blockquote>Version originale française / Translated English version follows<br>Si l’on fait le parallèle avec le régime d’accession à la propriété (« RAP ») ainsi qu’avec le compte d’épargne libre d’impôt pour l’achat d’une première propriété (« CÉLIAPP »), l’ARC a mentionné que la date d’acquisition de l’habitation est la date où la propriété devient habitable (eau courante, électricité, chauffage, salle de bain fonctionnelle, etc.).<br>   – <a href="https://taxinterpretations.com/cra/severed-letters/2024-1027801c6">APFF Financial Strategies and Instruments Roundtable Q.3, 2024-1027801C6 - Revente précipitée et auto-construction</a></blockquote>
    <blockquote>Translated English Version / Version originale française précède<br>Drawing parallels with the Home Buyers' Plan (HBP) [and] First Home Saving Account (FHSA), the CRA has stated that the date of acquisition of the dwelling is the date the property becomes habitable (running water, electricity, heat, functional bathroom, etc.).<br>   – <a href="https://taxinterpretations.com/cra/severed-letters/2024-1027801c6">APFF Financial Strategies and Instruments Roundtable Q.3, 2024-1027801C6 - Revente précipitée et auto-construction</a></blockquote>
    <p>Refer to <a href="https://taxinterpretations.com/cra/severed-letters/2023-0960541e5">CRA Technical Interpretation 2023-0960541E5</a> for how the spouse/common law partner’s residency and ownership affect the ‘Qualifying Individual’ and ‘Qualifying Withdrawals’ condition(s).</p>
    <p>Nonetheless, legislation dictates that the FHSA must be <b>closed</b> on the achievement of the <b>earliest</b> of these dates:
    <ul>
      <li>In the event a qualifying withdrawal was made, the <b>end (December 31) of the next calendar year</b>; or</li>
      <li>The date the individual turns <b>71 years old</b>; or</li>
      <li>On the <b>15th anniversary of opening the account</b>.</li>
    </ul>
    <p>To maximize tax incentives, the individual should aim to use all the funds for its specified purpose (buying a house) by the first of the above dates. Otherwise, they <b>always</b> have the option (at any time) of <b>rolling over amounts to an RRSP/RRIF</b> (no contribution room needed) or <b>withdrawing the funds as cash</b>, which would be <b>taxed</b> at the prevailing rates for (regular) employment income. For obvious reasons, these described scenarios should be avoided as much as possible.</p>
    <div class="box">
	    <p>With these dates in mind, let's consider Maggie's situation. She opened her FHSA on <b>1 November 2023</b> and contributed <b>8k</b> on the same date. She then further contributed <b>32k</b> on <b>1 January 2024</b>, reaching the contribution limit. On <b>16 November 2037</b>, she entered into an agreement to buy a townhouse in Toronto, and subsequently <b>closed</b> on said townhouse on <b>16 February 2038</b>. On this day, her FHSA had a FMV of <b>105k</b>, and she withdrew half for the downpayment on that day. Normally, she would have had until the end of the following year <b>(31 December 2039)</b> to fully close the FHSA, but due to the 15-year rule, Maggie <b>must</b> use or move the remaining <b>$52.5k</b> by 1 November 2038</b>.</p>
    </div>
    <p>In regard to tax deductions, FHSAs work similarly to RRSPs, such that tax deductions can be carried forward to future tax years. However, the CRA does not allow <b>FHSA-to-RRSP rollovers</b> to be deducted, as the taxpayer would have already been eligible to claim a deduction on initial contributions. Furthermore, FHSA contributions made in the <b>first 60 calendar days of a year cannot be deducted on that year’s tax return</b>, unlike the RRSP.</p>
    <p><b>To the second point of the article</b>, these three plans each have unique properties that should be maximized. In my experience, one of the main goals in tax planning is to reduce the client's tax liability. For individuals, this is generally achieved through maximizing deductions. In this regard, the FHSA offers a strong value proposition. When used to buy a house, the contribution and its growth can be withdrawn tax-free, while offering tax deductions – something the RRSP and TFSA do not offer on their own.</p>
    <p><b>Therefore, it is my (personal) opinion</b> that if the reader had enough funds, they should <b>prioritize</b> contribution to the FHSA. It is in their best interest to contribute as early as possible and give the investments time to grow, while delaying the deductions until their income is high. Even if the 15 year window is exhausted, once the funds roll over into the RRSP – <b>much preferred</b> over a taxable withdrawal due to tax brackets – individuals can take advantage of the newly raised HBP limit, which now allows Canadians to withdraw <b>up to $60k</b> for the purchase of a home from their RRSP, although this amount <b>must be repaid to the RRSP within 15 years.</b></p>
    <p>I must also realize that considering the audience of these articles, most people at this stage of life will <i>not</i> have much RRSP contribution room for there to be a significant tax benefit. In these cases, the TFSA is the next best option due to its unmatched flexibility in accessing funds – albeit at the expense of tax deductions. For those with modest income, a practical and balanced strategy would ideally focus on contributing the majority of their spare income to the FHSA and RRSP, while allocating some funds to the TFSA to preserve liquidity. In any sense, I urge every single eligible Canadian to open and contribute to <i>something</i> as soon as they can.</p>
    <p><b>A bit about us</b>: <b>KLee Tax</b> specializes in filing tax returns for individuals, businesses, and corporations. Whether you are working your first job, running a business, or an NPO looking to make a difference, you can be sure that <b>KLee Tax</b> will be there for your tax needs, when and where you need us.</p>
    <p><b>Unsure of where to start? Be sure to reach out below!</b></p>