---
layout: post
title: 'RESP: Really Essential School Prep'
description: 
image: assets/images/pic26.jpg
nav-menu: false
show_tile: false
---

<style>
  p {
    margin-bottom: 15px; /* Reduce space below paragraphs */
  }

  hr.major {
    margin: 10px 0; /* Equal space above and below the <hr> */
  }
</style>

<!-- Credits -->
<div class="row">
	<div class="12u">
		<p>By: <b>Ken Lee</b> | KLee Tax and Financial Services Co.<br> Published: 16 June 2025 4:00AM EST (Updated 16 June 2025 4:02AM EST)</p>
	</div>
</div>

<hr class="major"/>

<!-- Content -->

<section>
  <div class="row">
	  <div class="12u">
    <p><i>Photo Credit: National Bank</i></p>
    <p>Good morning Toronto! Children are indeed expensive. When it comes to post-secondary education, the fees can quickly add up! Today, we will break down how the <b>Registered Education Savings Plan (RESP)</b> can be used to efficiently save for future children’s educations. Specifically, we will discuss the rules surrounding contributions and withdrawals from the Plan.</p>
    <p>As the name suggests, the RESP is a Registered Plan that helps people (the <b>subscriber</b>) save money for someone else’s (the <b>beneficiary’s</b>) education. Usually, parents/guardians open up RESPs for their child(ren)’s future education.</p>
    <p>Technically, anyone can contribute to an RESP and name a beneficiary, provided the beneficiary has a SIN number (which must be provided to the financial institution) and is a Canadian resident at the time of the designation. For this reason, a beneficiary can have <b>multiple RESP accounts</b> – for example, one held by the parents and one held by grandparents. Regardless of how many RESP accounts exist, there is a <b>lifetime contribution limit of 50k across all accounts</b>. Although it is possible to contribute a lump sum, this is generally <b>NOT advisable</b>, for reasons which will soon be apparent. </p>
    <p>Like many other Registered Plans, RESPs are regular accounts where so-called <b>Qualified Investments</b> can be held. As a quick refresh, most investments (such as GICs, stocks, mutual funds, etc) are Qualified. Generally, Investments become <b>prohibited</b> only when someone owns a ‘substantial’ portion of a company, although these cases are fairly rare. See <b><a href="https://kleetax.ca/posts/2025/04-07-rrsp/">RRSP: Really Radical Savings Plan?</a></b> article for a more detailed discussion of acceptable investments. </p>
    <p>Some companies offer RESP management services, but this is <i>*highly*</i> NOT recommended due to many of these plans coming with high fees, penalties, and restrictive contracts. Generally, it is much better to hold the RESP as a regular self-directed account (where the subscriber has the option to choose investments themselves). A common strategy for investments is to buy and trade stocks, mutual funds, and ETFs during the first 10-15 years of the child’s life, and then <b>liquidating</b> these investments in favour of less volatile GICs (term deposits) as the child gets closer to graduating high school. </p>
    <p>Like other Registered Plans, there are incentives to save. Perhaps most well-known is that the government matches a portion of contributions to the account. With the <b>Canada Education Savings Grant (CESG)</b> scheme, the government matches <b>20% of the first $2.5k of contributions</b>, to a <b>lifetime maximum of $7,200 of CESG</b>. As discussed earlier, while there is no annual contribution limit, the government still highly encourages subscribers to contribute on a regular basis, rather than in a few lump sums, through the CESG scheme. If a child has multiple RESPs, then the CESG is given to the account that makes the first contribution. Contributions, unlike RRSP/FHSA contributions, are NOT tax-deductible. </p>
    <p>Should someone not contribute the full amount in a year, then CESG ‘room’ is carried forward, and subscribers can continue to receive the match on contributions made until the end of the calendar year in which a beneficiary turns 17. However, when the beneficiary is 16 or 17, one of two covered exceptions <b>MUST apply to be eligible for the CESG grant</b>. Namely: </p>
    <ul>
      <li>At least $2000 was contributed across all RESPs before the end of the calendar year the child turned 15, OR</li>
      <li>At least $100 was contributed across all RESPS in AT LEAST four (4) calendar years before the beneficiary turned 15.</li>
    </ul>
    <p>For lower-income families, the Canadian government also offers incentives for savings through additional matching incentives. The government matches an additional 10% on the first $500 of contributions of CESG for families with combined net incomes between $55,867 and $111,733*. If the net income is under $55,867, the match is now an additional 20% on the first $500. However, the lifetime CESG limits are still in place, so this additional CESG is essentially a scheme to lower the contributions needed to qualify for the maximum grant.</p>
    <p>Separately from the above, there is also the <b>Canada Learner's Bond (CLB)</b>. The income qualification for this scheme is based on both the number of children in the family and the child size. Currently, if a family has 1-3 children and their combined net income is under $55,867*, they qualify. As the number of children goes up, so does the income threshold. If the family qualifies, $500 per child is deposited into the RESP during the first year they qualify, with an additional $100 per year for each year they continue to qualify, until the year the child turns 18. </p>
    <p><i>*The net income figures are indexed (rise/decrease) to match inflation.</i></p>
    <div class="box">
	    <p><b>Example 1</b></p>
      <p>Sullivan’s newborn son was born on 1 January 2024. He opens an RESP on this day and contributes $2.5k each year. For simplicity’s sake, we will consider his family income is $50k each year. </p>
      <ul>
        <li>The net family income is under the government guidelines. By this metric, he qualifies for the additional CESG match and the CLB</li>
        <li>By contributing the maximum amount, he gets $600 of CESG each year (Basic amount of 20% on $2500 of contributions, plus low-income supplement of 20% on $500) and $500 of CLB in 2024, followed by $100 p/a from the second year onward</li>
        <li>By the end of 2029, he will have $4.6k of CESG/CLB, plus $15k of his own personal contributions, and any investment growth.</li>
      </ul>
      <p>He is promoted at the start of 2030. He now makes $120k p/a. </p>
      <ul>
        <li>He loses eligibility for the additional CESG and the CLB.</li>
        <li>He continues to receive the basic CESG (maximum of $500 p/a), but is still subject to the lifetime cap of $7.2k</li>
      </ul>
    </div>
    <p>On top of these, some provinces in Canada offer their own grants for education. For example, in British Columbia, the government offers a one-time payment of $1.2k into the RESPs of eligible children. Ontario has no such program. </p>
    <p>Unlike most of the Registered Plans we’ve discussed, the CESG and CLB are <b>NOT</b> governed by the Act or the Regulations. Instead, both are legislated in the <b>Canadian Education Savings Act (CESA)</b>, which, amongst other requirements, states that a child MUST be <b>‘resident in Canada’</b> to receive either benefit. While beyond the scope of this article, a child can live abroad and still be considered a factual tax resident of Canada under specific circumstances. However, the implications of CESA mean that these people <b>DO NOT</b> qualify for either benefit.</p>
    <p>Somewhat questionably, the definitions of ‘residence’ or ‘resident’ are not defined in the Act. Rather, several landmark cases (see Thomson v. Minister of National Revenue, 1946 SCR 209)  have essentially interpreted ‘resident in Canada’ to mean the person in question is physically present in Canada AND ordinarily living here. </p>
    <p>As seen, funds inside an RESP can come from multiple sources – subscriber contributions, government grants, and investment growth. When the time comes to withdraw the money, there are restrictions and rules for withdrawing from each source of funds. </p>
    <p>Most common of these are <b>Educational Assistance Payments (EAPs)</b>. EAPs are paid to the beneficiary if they are enrolled in a qualifying post-secondary program, which, for the most part, are colleges, universities, or trade schools. The funds are intended to help cover the costs of education, such as tuition, books, and living expenses. There are limits to withdrawals, which are:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>$8k in the first 13 weeks of a full-time program, and unlimited for any period afterwards.</li>
      <li>$4k per every 13 weeks of a part-time program.</li>
    </ul>
    <p>EAPs are drawn from the government grant and investment growth portion of the RESP, and are considered taxable income for the student. Generally, students tend to have little earned income during their studies. Any taxes are usually offset by the Tuition Tax Credit.</p>
    <p>The government also allows the original contributions to be withdrawn on a tax-free basis, since they were made with money that was already taxed when the original subscriber contributed to the account. These amounts can be paid to either the contributor or the beneficiary.</p>
    <div class="box">
	    <p><b>Example 2</b></p>
      <p>Isabelle is attending the full-time Health Science program at McMaster University. She has an RESP with $50k of contributions, $7.2k of CESG grants, and $45k of investment growth. Over the year, she anticipates she will need $15k to assist with various school expenses. She has no other earned income.</p>  
      <ul>
        <li>$52.2k of this RESP (CESG and investment growth) can be paid out as EAPs, subject to withdrawal limits. This is taxable income.</li>
        <li>She can also opt to withdraw the contributions of the RESP. This is not taxable.</li>
        <li>It is preferable for Isabelle to withdraw the funds as an EAP. Assuming she does not earn any additional income through the year, her income for taxation purposes will be $15k, which is under the basic personal limit. She can choose to withdraw the contributions on a tax-free basis if she subsequently has significant earned income.</li>
      </ul>
    </div>
    <p>However, sometimes the beneficiary chooses not to immediately attend school. In these cases, the government allows the RESP to remain open for up to 35 years. If the beneficiary qualifies for the <b>Disability Tax Credit</b> in the tax year of the 31st anniversary of the plan, then the RRSP is allowed to remain open for 40 years.</p>
    <p><i>*Generally, this means the beneficiary has significant impairment in performing <b>1 or more major life function(s) due to physical or mental disability</b>.</i></p>
    <p>Should the plan meet the deadline, it must be closed. Before closure, the account must be liquidated. The contributions are returned, tax-free, to the subscriber. All provincial grants, CESG, and CLB monies are repaid to their respective governments. The investment growth is paid out as <b>Accumulated Income Payments (AIPs)</b>, which are taxed like regular income, <b>plus an additional 20% surtax</b>. It should be noted that AIPs can also be paid out under additional pretexts. This can happen if: </p>
    <ul>
      <li>The RESP is opened for >10 years AND the beneficiary is > 21 years old AND not eligible for an EAP (this is satisfied if they are not attending a post-secondary institute) OR</li>
      <li>All the beneficiaries under the RESP are deceased</li>
    </ul>
    <p>In any event, if an AIP is paid, the RESP must be <b>fully closed by the end of the next February after the first AIP is paid</b>. </p>
    <p>Alternatively, AIP amounts can be <b>transferred</b> (where applicable) to the beneficiary’s Registered Disability Savings Plan on a tax-deferred basis, but are subject to, and will reduce, the $200k lifetime contribution limit for that plan. More commonly, up to $50k can be rolled-over to the subscriber’s RRSP, <b>provided there is still contribution room</b>. However, these contributions are not tax-deductible. If qualified, it is much more preferable to do either of the above rollovers, as opposed to paying the 20% surtax. If none of these options are viable, the funds must be withdrawn and subject to the tax.</p>
    <div class="box">
	    <p><b>Example 3</b></p>
      <p>Ken has had an RESP since 1 July 1990 for their child. The RESP is composed of $40k in contributions, $5k in grants, and $30k of investment growth. The child does not, nor has ever, had a DTC. The plan is quickly approaching the 35-year deadline. His annual income is currently $100k p/a.</p>  
      <ul>
        <li>Nikon can receive back all of its contributions, but must return the grant money to the government. The investment growth must be taken out as an AIP. </li>
        <li>He can elect to withdraw the growth now, as cash. At tax time, his income would now be $130k, and he would have to pay another 20% tax on the 30k.</li>
        <li>He can also elect to transfer this $30k to his RRSP, provided he has the contribution room.</li>
      </ul>
    </div>
    <p>--------</p>
    <p><b>A bit about us</b>: <b>KLee Tax</b> specializes in filing tax returns for individuals, businesses, and corporations. Whether you are working your first job, running a business, or an NPO looking to make a difference, you can be sure that <b>KLee Tax</b> will be there for your tax needs, when and where you need us.</p>
    <p><b>Unsure of where to start? Be sure to reach out below!</b></p>