---
layout: post
title: 'Matriculating Abroad: Understanding Canadian Tax Residency'
description: 
image: assets/images/pic42.jpg
credits: Princeton University
datetime: 9 Feburary 2026 4:00AM EST
nav-menu: false
show_tile: false
---

<!-- Content -->
<div class="row">
  <div class="12u">
  <div class="box_warning">
	   <p><i><b>Disclosures:</b> I am a PFA in good standing with <a href="https://advocis.ca/"><i>Advocis</i></a> and the <a href="https://iafe.ca/"><i>Institute</i></a>. This article is written purely for informative purposes. The views expressed are my own and do not represent those of any organizations I am affiliated with. The following should not be construed as legal nor tax advice. Consultation with your usual tax/legal professional is advised. Please contact us to discuss the contents of the article herein.</i></p>
    <p><i>All references to a spouse include common-law partners. All references to the ‘Act’ or the 'ITA' mean the Income Tax Act, RSC 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp.), as amended. All references to the ‘Regulations’ or the 'ITR' mean the Income Tax Regulations. All references to '26 USC' or the 'IRC' or the 'Code' refer to Internal Revenue Code of 1986, codified as Title 26, United States Code.</i></p>
  </div>
  <p>Good morning Toronto! While we do some things similarly to the United States, our neighbours to the south approach taxation quite differently regarding taxes! Today's article aims to provide a brief overview of the US tax system and key considerations for Canadian factual residents that intend to study in the US.</p>
  <p>The US tax system uses several different terms to the Canadian tax system, which are summarized below:</p>
  <div class="table-wrapper">
  <table>
    <thead>
      <tr>
        <th><b>Canadian Terminology</b></th>
        <th><b>US Equivalent</b></th>
      </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>Federal Income Tax</td>
        <td>Federal Income Tax</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Provincial Income Tax</td>
        <td>State Income Tax</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Canada Revenue Agency (CRA)</td>
        <td>Internal Revenue Service (IRS)</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>T1 Income Tax Package</td>
        <td>Form 1040</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>T4 slip</td>
        <td>Form W2</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>CPP Contributions</td>
        <td>Social Security Tax</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>EI Premiums</td>
        <td>Medicare Tax</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>OSAP</td>
        <td>FAFSA</td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
  </div>
  <p>A signficiant variatiopn between our tax systems is the manner of determining tax residency and liability. For example, if any Canadian or foreign national maintained sufficient residential ties to Canada and was not deemed a non-resident as a result of a tax treaty, they would be considered fully liable for all worldwide income. In other words, the Canadian tax system is blind to immigration status in considering tax liability. In constrast, either citizenship or residence in the US determine tax liability. For today's article, we will consider the following statues:</p>
  <ul>
    <li>US Citizens</li>
    <li>Resident Aliens</li>
    <li>Non-Resident Aliens</li>
  </ul>
  <p>The US is one of two countries in the world that operate a citizen-based taxation regime — the other being Eritrea. The effect of this regime is that US citizens (USCs) are treated as US tax residents. A USC will NEVER be treated as a non-resident, barring renounciation of citizenship. Furthermore, US citizenship is conferred on a jus soli basis, meaning that any individual born to the US — regardless of the parents' status — are USCs.</p>
  <p>Under US law, an 'alien' is anyone who is not a US citizen. An alien is a US resident if they meet either of the below tests:
  <ul>
    <li>Green Card Test (GCT): Held Lawful Permanent Residence (LPR) status at any point during the year.</li>
    <li>Substantial Presence Test (SPT): Spent at least 31 days in the US in the current year AND a weighted total of 183 days over the current year and the two preceding years.</li>
  </ul>
  <p>In the context of this article, any individual that holds a student/research visa (i.e. F-1, M-1, or J-1) or are the family member of an aforementioned individual are considered exempt individuals for the SPT. Thus, students, in addition to all other individuals that are not USCs AND failed BOTH the GCT & SPT will be considered to be 'Non-Resident Aliens (NRAs)', whom are taxed only on US-source income. 
  <p>USCs and Resident Aliens are taxed in the same manner, both being liable to tax on all worldwide income. In addition, USCs and RAs living abroad are subject to extensive reporting requirements. First, if the aggregate (combined) value of all bank accounts are over US$10k at any point during the year, the taxpayer must file a Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts (FBAR). Furthermore, those holding financial assets that have an aggregated value of over US$50k must file an information return with the IRS under Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA). FATCA also compels foreign government and foreign financial institutions to report accounts held by USCs and RAs to the IRS.
  <p>While Canada also requires its own tax residents to report foreign assets if their cost of acqiring the asset is over CA$100k under the T1135/T1134 regime, FATCA is significantly more far-reaching due to it's arguable intrusion on the sovereignty of foreign jurisdictions. To that end, the US' 'privileged' powers expands to its tax treaties. As discussed in <a href="https://kleetax.ca/posts/2026/01-26-ma1/"><i>Matriculating Abroad: Understanding Canadian Tax Residency</i></a>, tax treaties have tie-breaker rules which aim to deem an individual that would be considered a tax resident in two jurisdictions to be resident of only one for taxation purposes. With respect to the Canada-US Tax Treaty, Paragraph 2 of Article XXIX provides that:
  <blockquote>Except as provided in paragraph 3, nothing in the Convention shall be construed as preventing [the US] from taxing [...] its citizens [...] as if there were no convention between the United States and Canada with respect to taxes on income and on capital.</blockquote>
  <p>The 'saving clause' of the treaty specifically prevents USCs from claiming tie-breaker provisions which may assign residency to Canada. This means that a US citizen residing in Canada would, in effect, remain resident in both jurisdictions, and be subject to tax on their worldwide income in both jurisdictions. 
  <div class="box">
	   <p><b>Example 1</b></p>
    <p>Sophie was born in the US and left when she was young. Today, she is now a Canadian Citizen. Having lived in Canada for almost two decades, she has no residential ties to the US. She is considering a move to the US to attend an undergraduate program, after which she would return to Canada.</p>
    <ul>
      <li>By virtue of her US citizenship, she would be considered a US tax resident. Given her strong ties to Canada and intent to return after graduation, she would also be considered a Canadian factual resident.</li>
      <li>In spite of the tie-breaking rules likely being in Canada's favour, her US citizenship means that she will continue to be treated as a US tax resident.</li>
      <li>Sophie will be taxed on her worldwide income in both Canada and the US, and may be subject to US FBAR & FACTA in addition to Canadian T1135 regulations if she holds significant foreign assets.</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
  <div class="box">
	   <p><b>Example 2</b></p>
    <p>Kate is a Canadian citizen who recently returned to Canada after living in the US for 10 years. During her time in the US, she became a Permanent Resident. She sold all of her US possessions, and her spouse and children are accompanying her back to Canada.</p>
    <ul>
      <li>By virtue of her US PR status, she would be considered a US tax resident. Given she has reestablished strong residential ties to Canada, she would also be treated as a Canadian tax resident.</li>
      <li>The tie-breaking rules of the Treaty will be in Canada's favour.</li>
      <li>Unless Kate has assets or investments in the US, she will be considered to be a NRA for US tax purposes. She does not have to comply with FBAR or FACTA regulations.</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
  <p>For USCs or RAs living abroad, to reduce double taxation, the Code allows for:</p>
  <ul>
    <li>Foreign Earned Income Exclusion: $120k of income (that is not investment/passive in nature) may be excluded from income, provided the taxpayer was a resident of a foreign country for an entire tax year or spent 330 of the calendar year in a foreign country.</li>
    <li>Foreign Tax Credit: A dollar-for-dollar credit against US tax for foreign income taxes paid.*</li>
  </ul>
  <p><i>*Canadian law similarly provides a dollar-for-dollar credit against Canadian taxes for any foreign taxes paid. 
  <p>Canadian students studying in the US will likely have employment income (from a part time job), scholarship/fellowship income, and payments from an RESP. Of an RESP payment, only Educational Assistance Payments (EAPs) — that is, income drawn from the investment growth and government grant portion — are taxable income.</p>
  <p>An NRA will pay the standard graduated federal tax rates from employment income, similar to US residents. Unlike Canada, scholarships 
  

  <p>In all, the rules surrounding residency status and international taxation can be extremely convoluted. Generally, where multiple jurisdictions are concerned, taxation can become extremely tricky, extremely quickly. In these cases, having professional advice can be crucial in fully understanding your rights and responsibilities in each country. In the next article, join us as we discuss the implications of Canada-US taxation.
  <p>--------</p>
  <p><b>Too complicated? No worries! KLee Tax FSC</b> specializes in <b>international taxation</b> for individuals and corporations! Whether you are working your first job, running a business, or an NPO looking to make a difference, you can be sure that we will be there for your tax needs, when and where you need us.</p>
  <p><b>Contact us below for a consultation or to discuss the contents of this article!</b></p>